Add specification vision blog post. (#1166)
rust-lang/blog.rust-lang.org: posts/inside-rust/2023-11-09-spec-vision.md

---
layout: post
title: "Our Vision for the Rust Specification"
author: Eric, Felix, Joel and Mara
team: the specification team <https://www.rust-lang.org/governance/teams/lang#Specification%20team>
---

A few months ago, by accepting [RFC 3355](https://rust-lang.github.io/rfcs/3355-rust-spec.html), the decision was made to start working on an official specification for the Rust language. Eric (maintainer of the Rust Reference), Felix (Rust language team), Joel (Rust Foundation) and Mara (author of the RFC) have been working together to get this effort started.

With this blog post, we present the steps we have taken so far and our plans for approaching the rest of this big task.

## Editor

One of the first steps was to fill the role of "editor" [as laid out in the RFC](https://rust-lang.github.io/rfcs/3355-rust-spec.html#role-of-the-editor). The responsibility of coordination and editing of the specification is purposely delegated to the Rust Foundation, to ensure continuity of the work.

> As part of the hiring effort by the Foundation, we interviewed a few interested candidates with relevant experience. After a process in which an offer was eventually rejected by a candidate, the Foundation changed its approach and looked internally instead. The Foundation has given its Director of Technology, Joel, the opportunity to make the role of editor a part of his existing job. Because of his vast experience with industry standards and technical editing together with his already close proximity to the Rust project, Eric, Felix and Mara were quickly on board with having Joel as the editor, who has accepted this role.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As part of the hiring effort for this role by the Foundation, we interviewed a few interested candidates with relevant experience. Because an offer to a candidate was eventually rejected, the Foundation opted to consider internal options as an alternative. The Foundation's Director of Technology, Joel, came forward as a willing candidate for the position as part of his existing job. Eric, Felix, and Mara were quickly on board with the idea of having Joel as the Specification Editor due to his vast experience with industry standards and technical editing and his proximity to the Rust project.
```

## Specification Team

Since the editor will not be doing the work alone, we are forming a team around the specification work, the Specification Team, as a subteam of the language team.

Initially, its members are:

- Felix Klock (team lead)
- Mara Bos (team lead)
- Joel Marcey (team member, editor)
- Eric Huss (team member)

## Stakeholders

We will select and maintain a list of *stakeholders*, a selection of both experts and consumers of the specification, who will serve as advisors and reviewers.

Initially, the stakeholders will consist of:

- All members of the Rust language team
- One or more representatives from the types team
- One or more representatives from the operational semantics team
- One or more representatives from Ferrocene (High Assurance/Availability, e.g. Automotive Industry.)
- One or more representatives from Formal Methods Research and Development

> - Operating System Development (Rust for Linux; Microsoft)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- One or more representatives from Operating System Development (Rust for Linux; Microsoft)
```

Presumably?

## Authority and Approval

> While the specification team is in charge of writing and editing the specification, the authority over definition of the Rust language remains with the relevant teams, such as the language team and the library API team. Those teams are expected to engage other teams/subteams to provide their approval when necessary.

Reviewer 3: My expectation was that the spec team would nominate issues and create FCPs as well — I think we are missing some kind of mechanism for "regular updates" as well, that would let the lang team review the things that the spec team didn't feel required FCP, but I don't think that's specific to spec team and I don't think we have to discuss it in this post or thread.

> While the specification team is in charge of writing and editing the specification, the authority over definition of the Rust language remains with the relevant teams, such as the language team and the library API team. Those teams are expected to engage other teams/subteams to provide their approval when necessary.

Reviewer 3: That said, there are more details below that fit my expectations. Maybe just strike this sentence.

> While the specification team is in charge of writing and editing the specification, the authority over definition of the Rust language remains with the relevant teams, such as the language team and the library API team. Those teams are expected to engage other teams/subteams to provide their approval when necessary.

Reviewer 4: The reason for this sentence is to make it clear, for example, that T-lang is expected to talk to T-opsem when it comes to matters that fall under T-opsem's expertise.

The actual manner in which T-opsem is engaged isn't specified here. I could easily see such engagement taking the *form* of nominated issues, or FCP's, et cetera. But I don't see why *that* needs to be part of this doc.

Perhaps it need not be said that we expect teams to delegate matters to other subject matter experts when the need arises. I don't know, it felt right to me to include a reminder of this here.

> While the specification team is in charge of writing and editing the specification, the authority over definition of the Rust language remains with the relevant teams, such as the language team and the library API team. Those teams are expected to engage other teams/subteams to provide their approval when necessary.

Reviewer 4: Ah okay, I think I can choose a different, softer word here.

> While the specification team is in charge of writing and editing the specification, the authority over definition of the Rust language remains with the relevant teams, such as the language team and the library API team. Those teams are expected to engage other teams/subteams to provide their approval when necessary.

Reviewer 4: Hopefully addressed by https://github.com/rust-lang/blog.rust-lang.org/pull/1166/commits/06d327106c95253b3327e6efb5cacc77e7de2d6d

To allow the specification team to produce content and iterate on it without being blocked by approval processes, we will be working on a draft specification in our work repository.
With the help of some tooling, we will publicly keep track of which items still require team approval, and which items have open concerns from stakeholders.

We will categorize all changes as either a minor or a major change.
Minor changes are items that appear uncontroversial or trivial to the specification team.

> For example, changes that were already approved by the language team team via FCP, typographic and grammar fixes, clarifications where the original intent is clear, and similar unexciting changes.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
For example, changes that were already approved by the language team via FCP, typographic and grammar fixes, clarifications where the original intent is clear, and similar unexciting changes.
```

When defining semantics, one must be more explicit about any such wiggle-room.
Some Rust users *need* a description of the expected semantics as it stands for the Rust release that sits in their hands; they are the audience for version-specific details.
But other Rust users, such as some library developers, have a more forward-looking perspective.
The forward-looking developers may require an assurance that one specific code snippet A will always be accepted, and will also always have a particular meaning.
They may require an assurance that a different snippet B will *never* be accepted.
Or they may require an assurance that a third snippet C leveraging Unsafe Rust will always have undefined behavior (e.g. to justify a local transformation by arguing that no *new* undefined behavior is injected by that transformation.)
These are all cases that call for a prescriptive definition of the semantics; it does not matter in these cases what the compiler currently does -- what matters is what it will do in the future, which is inherently prescriptive.

> It would be premature to fix firm definitions in those areas, e.g. categorizing for each input program whether it is accepted or rejected by the type inference system, and then forcing all futures versions of Rust to follow that same categorization.

Reviewer 6: Is this supposed to be something like "There are other areas where it would be premature to fix firm definitions"? Otherwise this sounds like it's contradicting the previous paragraph.

Reviewer 4: I think the text says what it means.

It is not meant to be contradicting the previous paragraph.

The previous paragraph is saying that some users *need* prescriptive definitions; that detailed statements that only speak about the current version of Rust will not serve their purposes.

This paragraph is saying that the we need to take care in what the prescriptive definitions say, and not prematurely commit to things that will have to be overturned. So we explicitly frame things in terms of *bounds* on behavior.

Reviewer 4: You're right. I'm going to try to incorporate your feedback now.

Reviewer 4: Hopefully addressed by https://github.com/rust-lang/blog.rust-lang.org/pull/1166/commits/f72debebb2e697554b4b77e15e6d45aa37cbbc83

Another similar example: If we chose a fixed grammar, and then said all future versions of Rust must strictly categorize all source inputs as accepted or rejected according to that one grammar, then that would restrict our ability to add future backward-compatible language extensions to the grammar.
Therefore, these kinds of guarantees (especially with respect to details of the type inference rules, or details of what unsafe code is well-defined) are where the prescriptive *bounds* arise.
Such bounds allow for a middle ground of programs, where we do not commit all future versions of Rust to always make the same decision that the current version makes.
For example, one can then say, prescriptively, that a given grammar provides a lower bound on the set of programs that must be accepted by all future versions of Rust, while still allowing the language to evolve in a backward compatible fashion.
One can also say, descriptively, that the current version of Rust rejects source inputs that do not conform to the grammar.

> The descriptive definitions tell the reader how a construct will behave with respect to that Rust version; the prescriptive bounds tell the reader what they can and cannot expect to hold true in the future of Rust.

Reviewer 4: I folded this change into https://github.com/rust-lang/blog.rust-lang.org/pull/1166/commits/f72debebb2e697554b4b77e15e6d45aa37cbbc83

> Thus, we conclude that an ideal specification will need to address both the static and dynamic semantics, for both the prescriptive bounds and descriptive details.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Thus, we conclude that an ideal specification will need to use both prescriptive bounds and descriptive details, for both the static and dynamic semantics.
```

or

```suggestion
Thus, we conclude that an ideal specification will need to address both the static and dynamic semantics, with both prescriptive bounds and descriptive details.
```

Reviewer 4: I like your first suggestion, though I think I would opt to say the specification will "provide" both prescriptive bounds and descriptive details, rather than "use"

> **"delegates"**: There are broad areas where the questions of what semantics we want, and how they should be specified, are open research topics.

Reviewer 4: good catch.

> **"delegates"**: There are broad areas where the questions of what semantics we want, and how they should be specified, are open research topics.

Reviewer 4: addressed by https://github.com/rust-lang/blog.rust-lang.org/pull/1166/commits/e0ebbcc2346e0828dabf981004529773fa8a803b

Examples of such areas include: macros 2.0, the type inference rules, the trait matching rules, and the operational semantics of unsafe code.
It is not reasonable for the specification team to claim authority on such topics.
Instead, other teams will be invited to contribute their own detailed descriptions, which can be published as their own documents that the specification can reference.
Each such document is, like the specification itself, coupled to a specific Rust version.
Furthermore, each such document is analogous to the detailed descriptions: the scope of each document produced via delegation is intended to be restricted to a specific Rust version.

> If a contributing team has input about broader prescriptive rules that should hold beyond the current Rust version, then that should be be part of the Rust specification document itself.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
If a contributing team has input about broader prescriptive rules that should hold beyond the current Rust version, then that should be part of the Rust specification document itself.
```

Such prescriptive rules should always be the responsibility of the specification team to incorporate into the document.
All such prescriptive rules are then subject to the specification approval process.

</blockquote>
</details>

<p></p>

## Incremental Development

It is ambitious to provide both prescriptive bounds for current and future Rust versions and descriptive details of the current Rust version.
We will maximize the value of our efforts by working iteratively and incrementally.

> The specification can have gaps where the prescribed bounds are broader than necessary.

Reviewer 8: "broader" is ambiguous here, it could mean that more stuff is prescribed to be a certain way or that (what I assume you meant) less stuff is

Reviewer 4: hopefully addressed by https://github.com/rust-lang/blog.rust-lang.org/pull/1166/commits/9fb3a595128ab0bc21e553fd4bcbf33e5bb978be

Subsequent releases of the specification can tighten those prescribed bounds.

We expect early versions of the spec to focus heavily on delivering the detailed description of the current Rust version.

> Such a specification could be derived heavily from an existing work product, such the Ferrocene specification, since that explicitly focuses on providing a detailed description of a specific Rust version. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Such a specification could be derived heavily from an existing work product, such as the Ferrocene specification, since that explicitly focuses on providing a detailed description of a specific Rust version. 
```

Feedback on those version-specific descriptions will help us learn how best to craft the prescriptive bounds in the specification.

The prescriptive bounds can start with useful high-level guarantees (e.g. "safe Rust cannot cause undefined behavior"), and then future versions of the specification can incrementally add more details to the prescriptive bounds (e.g. "unsafe Rust cannot cause undefined behaviour under the following conditions: …"), incrementally gaining more details over time.

## Scope

The specification should cover at least the following areas of Rust's syntax and semantics. Some parts may be inherently coupled to specific backends or target implementation techniques (e.g. inline asm).

> * The grammar of Rust, specified via Backus-Naur Form (BMF) or some reasonable extension of BNF.

Reviewer 9: typo?
```suggestion
* The grammar of Rust, specified via Backus-Naur Form (BNF) or some reasonable extension of BNF.
```

* Macro expansion
    * Macro-by-example (`macro_rules`) transcription; Hygiene
    * `cfg` attributes
    * Procedural macros; attributes and derive
* Path and identifier resolution
    * Modules
* Static semantics
    * Type definitions; type expressions; layout
    * Type inference and type-checking; subtyping
    * Lifetimes and borrow-checking
* Generics; Associated item resolution and Trait solving
* Operational semantics of safe Rust
    * binding forms; match expressions; drop glue
    * moving and copying of values; borrows
    * field projection; method dispatch
    * operator overloading
* Operational semantics of unsafe Rust
    * memory model
    * inline assembly
* Const evaluation
* Crates and crate linkage

This list can be expanded over time.

## Presentation

> The Rust Specification will be a publicly accessible document, similar to all other Rust documentation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Rust Specification will be a publicly accessible document, similar to all other Rust documentation (and with the same [licensing](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/master/LICENSE-MIT) [terms](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/master/LICENSE-APACHE)).
```

Probably worth specifying this?

Reviewer 3: (Or, if there is a plan to use distinct licensing, worth clarifying that...)

The text will be written in English and will only use technical terms that are defined within the specification itself or that have clear definitions in a freely available online dictionary.

Individual items in the specification can each be referenced and named: not just in hyperlinks, but also in human text (e.g. "[syntax.patterns.arm.5]"). When possible, these names/references to items should persist across versions of the specification.

Iterations of the specification should include renderings that highlight the differences between versions. (See e.g. Ada Reference Manual.)

> The Rust specification will be maintained in a format that that encourages volunteer contribution, even if the specification team expects to have to reauthor each contribution in order to maintain a consistent voice for the specification.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The Rust specification will be maintained in a format that encourages volunteer contribution, even if the specification team expects to have to reauthor each contribution in order to maintain a consistent voice for the specification.
```

While completeness and correctness are the primary priority, we will try our best to make the specification as accessible as possible. Ideally, any Rust programmer should be able to dive in and find the answer to any language question they might have, without the need to ask a "language lawyer" who is already deeply familiar with the document.

### Release Cadence

> Rust releases continue to proceed independently of the specification approval process.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Rust releases will proceed independently of the specification approval process.
```

> If a specification has not been approved for a given release, then the release goes out without an associated specification.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
If a specification has not been approved for a given release, then the release will go out without an associated specification.
```

## Specification Team

Since the editor will not be doing the work alone, we are forming a team around the specification work, the Specification Team, as a subteam of the language team.

Initially, its members are:

- Felix Klock (team lead)
- Mara Bos (team lead)
- Joel Marcey (team member, editor)
- Eric Huss (team member)

## Stakeholders

We will select and maintain a list of *stakeholders*, a selection of both experts and consumers of the specification, who will serve as advisors and reviewers.

Initially, the stakeholders will consist of:

- All members of the Rust language team
- One or more representatives from the types team
- One or more representatives from the operational semantics team
- One or more representatives from Ferrocene (High Assurance/Availability, e.g. Automotive Industry.)
- One or more representatives from Formal Methods Research and Development
- One or more representatives from Operating System Development (Rust for Linux; Microsoft)

## Authority and Approval

> While the specification team is in charge of writing and editing the specification, the authority over definition of the Rust language remains with the relevant teams, such as the language team and the library API team. Those teams are expected to engage other teams/subteams to provide their approval when necessary.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
While the specification team is in charge of writing and editing the specification, the authority over definition of the Rust language remains with the relevant teams, such as the language team and the library API team. These teams are expected to involve other teams/subteams when necessary, such as by nominating issues for discussion and requesting FCP approval.
```
